Dapr for .NET Developers - Chapter 7 (#21851)
dotnet/docs: docs/architecture/dapr-for-net-developers/publish-subscribe-buildingblock.md

---
title: The Dapr Publish/Subscribe building block
description: A description of the Dapr Publish/Subscribe building-block and how to apply it
author: edwinvw
ms.date: 12/30/2020
---

# The Publish/Subscribe building block

> The [Publish-Subscribe pattern](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/patterns/publisher-subscriber) is a well-known and widely used messaging pattern. Architects commonly embrace it in distributed applications. However, the plumbing to implement it can be complex. There are often subtle feature differences across different messaging products. Dapr offers a building block that significantly simplifies implementing publish/subscribe functionality.

Reviewer: Yes, I will update this throughout the chapter.

## What it solves

The primary advantage of the Publish-Subscribe pattern is **loose coupling**, sometimes referred to as [temporal decoupling](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/guide/technology-choices/messaging#decoupling). The pattern decouples services that send messages (the **publishers**) from services that consume messages (the **subscribers**). Both publishers and subscribers are unaware of each other - both are dependent on a centralized **message broker** that distributes the messages.

Figure 7-1 shows the high-level architecture of the publish/subscribe pattern.

![The Publish/Subscribe pattern](./media/pubsub-pattern.png)

**Figure 7-1**. The publish/subscribe pattern.

From the previous figure, note the steps of the pattern:

1. Publishers send messages to the message broker.
2. Subscribers bind to a subscription on the message broker.
3. The message broker forwards a copy of the message to interested subscriptions.

> 4. Subscribers consume messages from their subscriptions.

Author: Interesting! Didn't know about Markdown auto numbering 😊

**Figure 7-3**. Publish/subscribe flow with Dapr.

From the previous figure, note the flow:

1. The Dapr sidecar for Service B calls the `/dapr/subscribe` endpoint from Service B (the consumer). The service responds with the subscriptions it wants to create.
2. The Dapr sidecar for Service B creates the requested subscriptions on the message broker.
3. Service A publishes a message at the `/v1.0/publish/<pubsubname>/<topic>` endpoint on the Dapr Service A sidecar.
4. The Service A sidecar publishes the message to the message broker.
5. The message broker sends a copy of the message to the Service B sidecar.
6. The Service B sidecar calls the endpoint corresponding to the subscription (in this case `/orders`) on Service B.

Making HTTP calls against the native Dapr APIs is time-consuming and abstract. Your calls are crafted at the HTTP level, and you'll need to handle plumbing concerns such as serialization and HTTP response codes. Fortunately, there's a more intuitive way. Dapr provides several language-specific SDKs for popular development platforms. At the time of this writing, Go, Node.js, Python, .NET, Java, and JavaScript are available.

### Using the Dapr .NET SDK

> For .NET Developers, the Dapr .NET SDK provides a more productive way of working with Dapr. The SDK exposes a `DaprClient` class through which you can directly invoke Dapr functionality. It's intuitive and easy to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For .NET Developers, the [Dapr .NET SDK](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Dapr.Client) provides a more productive way of working with Dapr. The SDK exposes a `DaprClient` class through which you can directly invoke Dapr functionality. It's intuitive and easy to use.
```

I'd assume you'd want to provide a link to the NuGet package, no?

> To publish a message, the `DaprClient` exposes a `PublishEventAsync` method. It's straightforward to use:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To publish a message, the `DaprClient` exposes a `PublishEventAsync` method.
```

```csharp
var data = new OrderData
{
  id = "123456",
  productId = "67890",
  amount = 2
}

> await PublishEventAsync<OrderData>("pubsub", "newOrder", data);

Reviewer 2: Don't you need a `DaprClient` instance to call the `PublishEventAsync` method on?

Reviewer: Yes, indeed! I will update this snippet.

The Publish/Subscribe building block also provides a declarative way of subscribing to a topic. Below you see an example of a Dapr configuration file for configuring a subscription:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Subscription
metadata:
  name: newOrder-subscription
spec:
  pubsubname: pubsub
  topic: newOrder
  route: /orders
scopes:
- ServiceB
- ServiceC
```

You have to specify several elements with every subscription:

- The name of the Dapr Publish/Subscribe component you want to use (in this case `pubsub`).
- The name of the topic to subscribe to (in this case `newOrder`).
- The API operation that needs to be called for this topic (in this case `/orders`).
- The [scope](https://docs.dapr.io/developing-applications/building-blocks/pubsub/pubsub-scopes/) can specify which services can publish and subscribe to a topic.

## Reference architecture: eShopOnDapr

> As mentioned earlier in an earlier chapter, the accompanying [eShopOnDapr](https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnDapr) app provides an end-to-end reference architecture for constructing a microservices application implementing Dapr. eShopOnDapr is an evolution of the widely popular [eShopOnContainers](https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnContainer) app, created several years ago. Both versions use the Publish/Subscribe pattern for communicating [integration events](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/cesardelatorre/domain-events-vs-integration-events-in-domain-driven-design-and-microservices-architectures/#integration-events) across microservices. Integration events include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The accompanying [eShopOnDapr](https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnDapr) app provides an end-to-end reference architecture for constructing a microservices application implementing Dapr. eShopOnDapr is an evolution of the widely popular [eShopOnContainers](https://github.com/dotnet-architecture/eShopOnContainer) app, created several years ago. Both versions use the Publish/Subscribe pattern for communicating [integration events](https://devblogs.microsoft.com/cesardelatorre/domain-events-vs-integration-events-in-domain-driven-design-and-microservices-architectures/#integration-events) across microservices. Integration events include:
```

- When a user checks-out a shopping basket.
- When a payment for an order has succeeded.
- When the grace-period of a purchase has expired.

Eventing in eShopOnContainers is based on the following `IEventBus` interface:

```csharp
public interface IEventBus
{
    void Publish(IntegrationEvent @event);

>     void Subscribe<T, TH>()
>         where T : IntegrationEvent
>         where TH : IIntegrationEventHandler<T>;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    void Subscribe<T, THandler>()
        where T : IntegrationEvent
        where THandler : IIntegrationEventHandler<T>;
```

As a C# developer myself, I typically prefer when there are multiple type parameters that at the very least the second parameter has a bit more explicit name. I'd even argue that when you have two, the first could also benefit from that. You might even consider:

```csharp
void Subscribe<TEvent, THandler>()
        where TEvent : IntegrationEvent
        where THandler : IIntegrationEventHandler<TEvent>;
```

While a bit more verbose, it is much much easier to read.

Reviewer: I totally agree. This code was copied as-is from the eShopOnContainers codebase, but for the reader of the book, it is better to be more verbose. 
We will also update the code in eShopOnDapr to use more verbose type parameters and reflect that in the sample snippets.

}
```

Concrete implementations of this interface exist in eShopOnContainers for both RabbitMQ and Azure Service Bus. Each implementation included a great deal of custom plumbing code that was complex to understand and difficult to maintain.

The newer eShopOnDapr significantly simplifies Publish/Subscribe behavior by using Dapr. For example, the `IEventBus` interface was reduced to a single method:

```csharp
public interface IEventBus
{

>     Task PublishAsync(IntegrationEvent @event);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Task PublishAsync(IntegrationEvent integrationEvent);
```

Try to avoid variables starting with `@` due to reserved/keyword conflicts when unnecessary. Simply name it what it is, an `integrationEvent`.

In the updated eShopOnDapr, a single `DaprEventBus` implementation can support any Dapr-supported message broker. The following code block shows the simplified Publish method. Note how the `PublishAsync` method uses the Dapr client to publish an event:

```csharp
public class DaprEventBus : IEventBus
{
    private const string DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME = "pubsub";

    private readonly DaprClient _dapr;
    private readonly ILogger<DaprEventBus> _logger;

    public DaprEventBus(DaprClient dapr, ILogger<DaprEventBus> logger)
    {
        _dapr = dapr;
        _logger = logger;
    }

    public async Task PublishAsync<TIntegrationEvent>(TIntegrationEvent @event)
        where TIntegrationEvent : IntegrationEvent
    {
        var topicName = @event.GetType().Name;

        _logger.LogInformation("Publishing event {@Event} to {PubsubName}.{TopicName}", @event, DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME, topicName);

        // Make sure to pass the concrete event type to PublishEventAsync,
        // which can be accomplished by casting the event to dynamic. This ensures
        // that all event fields are properly serialized.
        await _dapr.PublishEventAsync(DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME, topicName, (dynamic)@event);

>     }

Reviewer: I agree about the name. I will update that in the code and the snippet.
String interpolation is not used in log statements because eShopOnDapr uses Serilog as logging framework. And by specifying the variables like this, they will be exposed as separate (searchable) properties on each log-record (see https://github.com/serilog/serilog/wiki/Writing-Log-Events).

}
```

As you can see in the code snippet, the topic name is derived from event type's name. Because all eShop services use the `IEventBus` abstraction, retrofitting Dapr required *absolutely no change* to the mainline application code.

> > Note how we cast the event parameter to a C# `dynamic` type. This workaround is necessary because in .NET 3.1 the `System.Text.Json` serializer does not support polymorphism yet. The Dapr SDK uses `System.Text.Json` to serialize/deserialize messages. In the eShop code, an event is sometimes explicitly declared as an `IntegrationEvent`, the base-class for integration events. This is done because the specific event-type is determined dynamically at runtime based on business-logic. As a result, the event is serialized using the type information of the base-class and not the derived class. The message payload won't contain all the fields of the event, but only those declared on the base-class. Our workaround circumvents this and all the fields are correctly serialized.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!IMPORTANT]
> There is a cast on the event parameter to a C# `dynamic` type. This workaround is necessary because in .NET 3.1 the `System.Text.Json` serializer does not support polymorphism yet. The Dapr SDK uses `System.Text.Json` to serialize/deserialize messages. In the eShop code, an event is sometimes explicitly declared as an `IntegrationEvent`, the base-class for integration events. This is done because the specific event-type is determined dynamically at runtime based on business-logic. As a result, the event is serialized using the type information of the base-class and not the derived class. The message payload won't contain all the fields of the event, but only those declared on the base-class. Our workaround circumvents this and all the fields are correctly serialized.
```

eShopOnDapr streamlines the plumbing for event subscriptions by using Dapr ASP.NET Core libraries. Each event is handled by an action method in the controller. A `Topic` attribute decorates the action method with the name of the corresponding topic to subscribe to. Here's a code snippet taken from the `PaymentService`:

```csharp
[Route("api/v1/[controller]")]
[ApiController]
public class IntegrationEventController : ControllerBase
{
    private const string DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME = "pubsub";

    private readonly IServiceProvider _serviceProvider;

    public IntegrationEventController(IServiceProvider serviceProvider)
    {
        _serviceProvider = serviceProvider;
    }

    [HttpPost("OrderStatusChangedToValidated")]
    [Topic(DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME, "OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEvent")]
    public async Task OrderStarted(OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEvent @event)
    {
        var handler = _serviceProvider.GetRequiredService<OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEventHandler>();
        await handler.Handle(@event);
    }
}
```

> Note in the `Topic` attribute how the name of the event type is used as the topic name to which to subscribe. Then, an event handler that existed in the earlier eShopOnContainers code base is invoked. In the previous example, messages received from the `OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEvent` topic invoke the existing  `OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEventHandler` event-handler. Because Dapr implements the underlying plumbing for subscriptions and message brokers, a large amount of original code became obsolete and was removed from the code-base. Much of this code was complex to understand and challenging to maintain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `Topic` attribute name corresponds to the event type in the subscription. Then, an event handler that existed in the earlier eShopOnContainers code base is invoked. In the previous example, messages received from the `OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEvent` topic invoke the existing  `OrderStatusChangedToValidatedIntegrationEventHandler` event-handler. Because Dapr implements the underlying plumbing for subscriptions and message brokers, a large amount of original code became obsolete and was removed from the code-base. Much of this code was complex to understand and challenging to maintain.
```

Please try to avoid starting sentences with "Note ...".

Reviewer: I've changed the first sentence, but not entirely according to your suggestion:

> "In the `Topic` attribute, the name of the .NET type of the event is used as the topic name."

Do you agree with my change?

Reviewer 2: That makes sense to me, thanks.

### Using Publish/Subscribe components

Within the eShopOnDapr repository, a `deployment` folder contains files for deploying the application using different deployment modes: `Docker Compose` and `Kubernetes`. A `dapr` folder exists within each of these folders that holds a `components` folder. This folder holds a file `eshop-pubsub.yaml` containing the configuration of the Dapr Publish/Subscribe component that the application will use for Publish/Subscribe behavior. As you saw in the earlier code snippets, the name of the Publish/Subscribe component used is `pubsub`. Here's the content of the `eshop-pubsub.yaml` file in the `deployment/compose/dapr/components` folder:

```yaml
apiVersion: dapr.io/v1alpha1
kind: Component
metadata:
  name: pubsub
  namespace: default
spec:
  type: pubsub.nats
  metadata:
  - name: natsURL
    value: nats://demo.nats.io:4222
```

> Note how the [NATS message broker](https://nats.io/) is configured for this example. To change message brokers, you need only to configure a different message broker, such as RabbitMQ or Azure Service Bus and update the yaml file. With Dapr, there are no changes to your mainline service code when switching message brokers.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The preceding configuration specifies the desired [NATS message broker](https://nats.io/) for this example. To change message brokers, you need only to configure a different message broker, such as RabbitMQ or Azure Service Bus and update the yaml file. With Dapr, there are no changes to your mainline service code when switching message brokers.
```

> Finally, you might ask, "Why would I need multiple message brokers in an application?". Many times a system will handle workloads with different characteristics. One event may occur 10 times a day, but another event occurs 5000 times per second. You may benefit by partitioning messaging traffic to different message brokers. With Dapr, you can add multiple Publish/Subscribe component configurations, each with a different name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, you might ask, "Why would I need multiple message brokers in an application?". Many times a system will handle workloads with different characteristics. One event may occur 10 times a day, but another event occurs 5,000 times per second. You may benefit by partitioning messaging traffic to different message brokers. With Dapr, you can add multiple Publish/Subscribe component configurations, each with a different name.
```

## Summary

The Publish/Subscribe pattern helps you decouple services in a distributed application. The Dapr Publish/Subscribe building block simplifies implementing this behavior in your application.

Through the Dapr Publish-Subscribe building block, you can publish messages to a specific *topic*. As well, the building block will query your service to determine which topic(s) to subscribe to.

You can use the Publish/Subscribe building block natively over HTTP or by using one of the language-specific SDKs, such as the .NET SDK for Dapr. The .NET SDK tightly integrates with the ASP.NET core platform.

With Dapr, you can plug a supported message broker product into your application. You can then swap message brokers without requiring code changes to your application.

> ### References
> 
> >[!div class="step-by-step"]
> >[Previous](serviceinvocation.md)
> >[Next](bindings-buildingblock.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!div class="step-by-step"]
> [Previous](serviceinvocation.md)
> [Next](bindings-buildingblock.md)
```

This is the navigation of the chapters, not References. Also, these files do not yet exist and are causing build warnings. We might want to comment this out for now.

## What it solves

The primary advantage of the Publish-Subscribe pattern is **loose coupling**, sometimes referred to as [temporal decoupling](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/guide/technology-choices/messaging#decoupling). The pattern decouples services that send messages (the **publishers**) from services that consume messages (the **subscribers**). Both publishers and subscribers are unaware of each other - both are dependent on a centralized **message broker** that distributes the messages.

Figure 7-1 shows the high-level architecture of the publish/subscribe pattern.

![The Publish/Subscribe pattern](./media/pubsub-pattern.png)

**Figure 7-1**. The publish/subscribe pattern.

From the previous figure, note the steps of the pattern:

- Publishers send messages to the message broker.
- Subscribers bind to a subscription on the message broker.
- The message broker forwards a copy of the message to interested subscriptions.
- Subscribers consume messages from their subscriptions.

> Most message brokers encapsulate a queueing mechanism that can persist messages once received. With it, the message broker guarantees **durablity** by storing the message. Subscribers don't need to be immediately available or even online when a publisher sends a message.  Once available, the subscriber receives and processes the message.  Dapr guarantees **At-Least-Once** semantics for message delivery. Once a message is published, it will be delivered at least once to any interested subscriber.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Most message brokers encapsulate a queueing mechanism that can persist messages once received. With it, the message broker guarantees **durability** by storing the message. Subscribers don't need to be immediately available or even online when a publisher sends a message.  Once available, the subscriber receives and processes the message.  Dapr guarantees **At-Least-Once** semantics for message delivery. Once a message is published, it will be delivered at least once to any interested subscriber.
```

 > If your service can only process a message once, you'll need to provide an [idempotency check](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/architecture/microservices/design/api-design#idempotent-operations) to ensure that the same message is not processed multiple times. While such logic can be coded, some message brokers, such as Azure Service Bus, provide built-in *duplicate detection* messaging capabilities.

> There are several message broker products available - both commercially and open-source. Each has advantages and drawbacks. Your job is to match your system requirements to the appropriate broker. Once selected, it's a best practice to decouple your application from message broker plumbing. You do this by wrapping the broker inside an *abstraction*. The abstraction encapsulates the message plumbing and exposes generic publish and subscribe operations to your code. Your code communicates with the abstraction, not the actual message broker. While a wise decision, you'll have to write and maintain the abstraction and its underlying implementation. This approach requires custom code that can be complex, repetitive, and error-prone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are several message broker products available - both commercially and open-source. Each has advantages and drawbacks. Your job is to match your system requirements to the appropriate broker. Once selected, it's a best practice to decouple your application from message broker plumbing. You achieve this functionality by wrapping the broker inside an *abstraction*. The abstraction encapsulates the message plumbing and exposes generic publish and subscribe operations to your code. Your code communicates with the abstraction, not the actual message broker. While a wise decision, you'll have to write and maintain the abstraction and its underlying implementation. This approach requires custom code that can be complex, repetitive, and error-prone.
```

Here's where Dapr comes to your rescue. The Dapr Publish/Subscribe building block provides the messaging abstraction and implementation out-of-the-box. The custom code you would have had to write is prebuilt and encapsulated inside the Dapr building block. You bind to it and consume it. Instead of writing messaging plumbing code, you and your team focus on creating business functionality that adds value to your customers.

## How it works

> The Dapr Publish/Subscribe building block provides a platform agnostic API framework to send and receive messages. Your services publish messages to a named [topic](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/service-bus-messaging/service-bus-queues-topics-subscriptions#topics-and-subscriptions). Your services subscribe to a topic to consume messages.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Dapr Publish/Subscribe building block provides a platform-agnostic API framework to send and receive messages. Your services publish messages to a named [topic](https://docs.microsoft.com/azure/service-bus-messaging/service-bus-queues-topics-subscriptions#topics-and-subscriptions). Your services subscribe to a topic to consume messages.
```

At the lowest level, any programming platform can invoke the building block over HTTP or gRPC using the **Dapr native API**. To publish a message, you make the following API call:

``` http
http://localhost:<daprPort>/v1.0/publish/<pubsubname>/<topic>
```

Note the Dapr specific URL segments in the above call:

- `<daprPort>` provides the port number upon which the Dapr sidecar is listening.
- `<pubsubname>` provides the name of the selected Dapr publish-subscribe component.
- `<topic>` provides the name of the topic to which the message is published.

Using the *curl* command-line tool to publish a message, you can try it out:

``` curl
curl -X POST http://localhost:3500/v1.0/publish/pubsub/newOrder \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{ "orderId": "1234", "productId": "5678", "amount": 2 }'
```

You receive messages by subscribing to a topic. At startup, he Dapr runtime will call your application on a well-known endpoint to identify and create the required subscriptions:

``` http
http://localhost:<appPort>/dapr/subscribe
```

- `<appPort>` informs the Dapr sidecar of the port upon which your application is listening.

> You can implement this endpoint yourself. But Dapr provides more intuitive ways of implementing it. We'll address this later in this chapter.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can implement this endpoint yourself. But Dapr provides more intuitive ways of implementing it. We'll address this functionality later in this chapter.
```

```csharp
public class DaprEventBus : IEventBus
{
    private const string DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME = "pubsub";

    private readonly DaprClient _dapr;
    private readonly ILogger<DaprEventBus> _logger;

    public DaprEventBus(DaprClient dapr, ILogger<DaprEventBus> logger)
    {
        _dapr = dapr;
        _logger = logger;
    }

    public async Task PublishAsync<TIntegrationEvent>(TIntegrationEvent @event)
        where TIntegrationEvent : IntegrationEvent
    {
        var topicName = @event.GetType().Name;

        _logger.LogInformation("Publishing event {@Event} to {PubsubName}.{TopicName}", @event, DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME, topicName);

        // We need to make sure that we pass the concrete type to PublishEventAsync,
        // which can be accomplished by casting the event to dynamic. This ensures
        // that all event fields are properly serialized.
        await _dapr.PublishEventAsync(DAPR_PUBSUB_NAME, topicName, (dynamic)@event);
    }
}
```

As you can see in the code snippet, the topic name is derived from event type's name. Because all eShop services use the `IEventBus` abstraction, retrofitting Dapr required *absolutely no change* to the mainline application code.

> > Note how we cast the event parameter to a C# `dynamic` type. This workaround addresses an issue found in the `System.Text.Json` serializer, the Dapr SDK uses to serialize/deserialize messages. In the eShop code, an event is sometimes explicitly declared as the base-class for events `IntegrationEvent`. This is done because the specific event-type is determined dynamically at runtime based on business-logic, as seen in the following example:

Author: We shouldn't call this an issue with S.T.Json. In .NET Core 3.1, S.T.Json has no real support for polymorphism. Let's say we've got a base class called `Shape` and a concrete class called `Circle` derived from `Shape`.
Calling `Serialize<Shape>(aCircleInstance)` will only serialize the members of `Shape` and ignore any members defined on `Circle`. This is by design. Using "issue" makes it look like a bug.

Reviewer: I've updated the text accordingly.
